okay
hello everyone
let me start recording
okay welcome to our lecture two
third could you hear me could you see me
i'm good
yes we can
hi john so great
before we establish our lecture i think
uh most of you or all of you have
already signed up to the microsoft teams
uh we created a channel last week make
sure you are there and
if you have already formed your uh
groups for wireless sensor network
project please feel free to create your
mini channel
let's say three four students and then
feel free to invite angus
annoy to your channel so if you need any
help we can help you
for general questions please
put your question on the general channel
so everyone can see and contribute and
probably your question is someone's
question as well
but for confidential questions or if you
need any like
individual support you can invite us to
your channel
uh so let's do it as soon as you can and
if you don't know anyone in
this class you can advertise your skills
and
your preference for example you can sell
blog to join hardware stream or software
stream
and then you can create your team
it's not too urgent but the sooner you
know your
team members the better any questions
this session is recording by the way
today's session
so shall i move on to our
lecture if there is no question let me
share my screen
could you see my slide
yes
[Music]
i just need to check multiple things so
did you have a good weekend by the way
okay
can you see a full screen slideshow
just want to make sure uh yeah we can
see
correct screen
okay so great we have 37
students and thank you so much for
joining today's class
and this is not a formal lecture
probably you noticed so far
feel free to stop me anytime if you have
any questions and
i would love to have more uh discussions
during the lecture it's not like a
traditional lecture
and i just want to talk and you sit
there and listen it would be boring
so please feel free to unmute yourself
turn around your camera
anytime you like and engage with
discussions and
i may ask some questions also in the
middle of lecture so
your engagement is really valuable not
only for yourself because you will learn
to
learn the content more deeply but also
it's valuable for myself because
it's would be more enjoyable for me and
some of you asked me if there is any
bonus mark uh
uh to attend the class or to join
discussions
i wish we could dedicate some bonus
marks because that i think this would be
very encouraging for some students to
join the class and also
get involved with discussions but based
on policies
we cannot dedicate any bonus marks
everything should be based on assessment
but as the coordinator and lecturer have
the authority to say for example
then you achieve a more close to
borderline let's say close to
pass mark or distinction or higher
distinction i can
uh
for example if you get 84 i can change
it to 85 uh
roll it to 85 or something like i don't
want to give you exact numbers
but case by case is different and will
definitely
consider your class activities
at that time so uh
join our class and get more involved so
there is a question here
no uh i can't hear you can some of you
say something see if i can hear you or
not
hello
[Music]
hello can you hear us
could you say something see if i can
hear you or not
yeah we did say something
no let me see
uh see if i can rectify this or not
but now say something yes
you testing
uh it's good we have same issue every
time so troubleshooting is really
straightforward
as as soon as i connect a laptop to my
mind just to have a larger screen here
this issue and do all settings here but
anyway this is my laptop this one can
you see
[Music]
okay let me see it's coming
okay could you see it from the screen
here yeah yes we can
great great so if i missed anything
please feel free to repeat again i
couldn't hear you sorry
so there is a chat box
okay
so let's uh go through our uh
lecture by the end of this session or
probably in the middle we will have
break and we can discuss more about your
other questions
uh so today we're gonna focus on writing
in wireless natural network section one
we have three sessions dedicated to
routing and to me
this topic is really important because
as an engineer or researcher you will
get invo if
in this domain you will get involved
with this
topic so and it is really interesting uh
uh i think you you will probably enjoy
it as well it's really important after
you design your network you want to
create russ
so i hope this session and the following
sessions help you to understand the
fundamentals of
routing in wirelessness or network so
let's move on today is just a brief
agenda
we're going to focus on flat-based
routing and also writing protocols based
on
operation type and briefly about writing
metrics
and there would be some questions in
your quiz bond
around the routing
uh definitely um here this is a
protocol cycle wireless sensor network
we have application layer on top we have
transport layer
application arrays mainly in charge of
uh generating sensor network
applications
then we have a reliable end-to-end data
delivery and transport layer
and the network layer is in charge of
routing
uh some of you may probably have
confused that routing is the
responsibility of transport layer
because of the
name but this is not the case routing is
the responsibility of network layer
and then we have a medium access control
at data link layer and
converting bits two signals is the
responsibility of physical layer
and these subjects we mainly focus on
network layer
but you will see there are so many
things in
other layers are as well probably this
will cover in
different subjects
whether it's i'll have a camera here and
my slides over there so
if you see i'm looking at different
angles so this is the reason
and trying to create eye contact with
you but it's really hard because i can
only see
let's see a couple of students here but
that's fine
i hope to see some of you in tomorrow's
lab as well so uh briefly about
rationable behind the
routing routine protocol is responsible
for finding
and maintaining paths from sensor to
sync we call sync or basisation
it's like a gateway and
the basically the process of
establishing a path from a sensor to a
sink is called routing
just the definition it is really
important and obviously essential for
notes to self-organize themselves you
remember last session we discussed about
uh deploying sensors from airplanes so
they don't have such a
such a global addressing gear mechanism
they should be able to self-organize
themselves
find their own location find the
location of the position of their
neighbors and identify their neighbors
and also to
discover paths this is these are all the
responsibilities of sensors
so you may imagine how smart they should
be to find their own location and to
find the location of their name
neighbors and also to create that past
or
the route so net for players in charge
of routing
and there is no global oil processing uh
in wireless and so network uh just
uh very simply here you will see we have
a
direct connection it's like a star
topology we discussed last year
and also we have multiple connections we
go through these
different examples so we
as you remember from our previous
session we have limitations on energy
storage and processing capacity
so whenever we want to create a route we
should
keep this in mind that we have these uh
cons
constraints in wireless sensor network
so we're looking for lightweight
adaptive and flexible
routing protocols not necessarily all
protocols in
different wireless networks are
applicable in
wireless sensor networks so you need to
address these limitations in wireless
and so network
you would not be able to have fancy
algorithms for routing we should keep it
very simple on the
lightweight and
here is direct communication model in
wirelessness or network basically we
have all sensors can communicate
directly through single hub with the
sync or basic station or gateway it is
very simple this is structured but it's
not very visible in larger scale
wattages or networks
and
let me see if i've got more notes here
[Music]
okay in the second scenario we we have
we have multiple notes here
and you see each node is connected to
sync this nodes here through
multiple hops so they can these sensors
here this nodes here they not only
generate and disseminates their own
information but they also work as a
relay this one
can do sensing and can create some
information as well as working as a
relay to pass information from this
sensor
to the node to the sink so these sensors
are in terms of
structure they are more advanced because
they can
sense and also they can work as a relay
uh
to pass information from neighbors to
the city
so let's say for example we have in this
viruses on network we have over 50
students if all of you want to
communicate with me
if now if all of you want to say
something you need to unmute yourself
and say something this would create some
overlap in our communication
so you you can pass your information to
your neighbor to one of your classmates
and then they can
send it to me on behalf of you so you
can minimize communication this way
and so this is uh multiple permission
the second one here
so uh sensors working collaboratively to
pass information
and to the sink uh beauty about this the
first modality communication is
it's more reliable you can guarantee
that because you can directly for
example communicate with the sink
in and then there's you can guarantee
that your
information will be received by this
thing but in this way
fading may appear or other things
because you have multi-hops here
so a good thing about
current communication is a reliability
but the many disadvantages congestion
so um this is a very
famous diagram classification of routing
protocols in general we can categorize
everything here in one graph
and through this session and the coming
sessions we cover
everything in this uh diagram in terms
of routing protocols we can categorize
them
based on wireless sensors for topology
and operation
type in terms of wireless sensor network
psychology uh
just focusing on topology for a moment
we have flat-based routing
hierarchical based writing
location-based writing
today we focus on flat-based writing in
terms of
operation type we have negotiation-based
operation type we have multi-pass
based operation type query based
quality of service and coherent base
these are all in terms of uh
operation in terms of route discovery
mechanism you have reactive routing for
active and hybrid
depends on your application one uh one
of these or a couple of these will be
your criteria
for example you have to design a
hierarchical base because of your
application and then you can
add more novelty to your network by
addressing some of the operational
operation type or route discovery
mechanism
so you can have a mix and match of
different things in your
routing protocols based on your
application
any questions so far
no good no
great so
just here so you can take a look in
terms of topology we have
flat space in this topology all nodes
are equal
imagine we have thousands of sensors all
of them
have a similar responsibility and we go
through a bit more details and examples
to tell you what are the advantages and
disadvantages in
hierarchical base writing you have
different rules for different notes
you have clusters and cluster heads so
not necessarily
all nodes play the same role this is
good and bad there it has advantages and
disadvantages we will cover this next
session
uh and uh
location based routing notes rely on
location information this is basically
based on geographical
location you call it location based
because the
physical location of nodes there is
really important for us
in terms of route discovery mechanism
you have reactive or another name you
call it on demand
basically you a sensor
can find a route only when needed so you
don't
have a proactive approach when you
establish rust before you need them
you only create the route as a sensor
when you need it
so we call it on demand and the other
one is correctly or table driven
as you can guess from the name you have
a table of uh
routing addresses so you establish
routes before you need them again we
cover everything in details with
examples later
hybrid as you can see from the name is a
combination of reactive variety
and operation type
here this one these five categories here
negotiation base basically we negotiate
the
data transfers before they occur so we
have some sort of negotiation in advance
we don't send or receive unnecessary
information
and basically we with this negotiation
routing will be aiming to reduce uh
redundant data transmission so if you've
already received some information
you can negotiate with the sender sender
so you don't get
redundant information multi-pass
based routing is another type of
operation in wirelessness or network
basically multiplayer space portables
use
multiple routes simultaneously to
achieve higher
uh fault tolerance so you have
multiple routes you use that
simultaneously in case you
lose one of the rod due to security
attack or if you
uh lose your sensors due to some
physical problem
so you have multiple paths
simultaneously
and this would basically improve your
performance and fall tolerance another
operation is query based
uh query based writing protocols are
received very initiated you have some
examples around this
basically the receiver initiate a
question the receiver the sink
ask you i need this one do you have this
information and you as a sensor send
this information so it's the query based
space on question and what's the last
one
uh so uh not the last one uh
quality of service space the goal of
quality of service space throughout in
portugal is to satisfy
certain quality of services for example
you have some metrics in your
wireless sensor network you want to
address this one so this is your
criteria for example you want to create
a network with very low latency or very
low energy consumption or low packet
loss
these are your uh quality
these are your criteria if you address
this you you can focus mainly on quality
of service routing
and coherent base is basically
a performance minimum amount of
processing so
the risk whatever i mentioned is not the
criteria in this mechanism
coherent base the criteria is to perform
minimum amount of processing this is
basically for
when you don't have any uh uh specific
tasks for i mean
it's not very critical so your priority
is to minimize the amount of processing
whereas where you have a specific
criteria you should go through
quality of service or other
operation type any questions so far
feel free to stop me if i uh move on
very quickly
so in terms of metrics there are
many routing metrics i'm going to focus
on the most important routing metrics in
wireless sensor network
remember in wireless sensor network our
main constraints are on
energy and
storage and processing so these are our
three main constraints
we want to see how we can minimize our
energy
consumption we want to see how we can
minimize our
processing and maximize our storage so
these are our three main
um constraints so when designing a
routing protocol
just to keep these constraints in mind
so
um minimum hope this is one of the
as a designer or you may
be asked to design a wireless sensor
network to address minimum pop
shortest hop magic uh uh
created like an example a small
animation you will see in uh
coming slow so we can go through
examples together but just as definition
here
a minimum hub is basically using the
shortest path
uh which will result in low end-to-end
delays and low resources
uh resource consumption you want to
let's say you want to take a bus from
your home
to uts your criteria is to pass
through the minimum number of stops so
you select a boss with
what's called the straw yes
limited stocks or express or transitions
so this is your criteria you don't care
if you go through a longer pass
doesn't matter you just don't want to go
through too many hops and
stops so this is your this is the
smallest possible number of forwarding
notes
uh so depends on the criteria sometimes
this is your criteria
[Music]
so uh
so in a in the this is very simple
technique and
this technique every link has the same
cost and a minimum copyrighting protocol
selects the
route that minimize the total cost so
imagine
all nodes in this
scenario has the same amount of cost
so your goal is to minimize the cost so
to minimize the cost you should pass
through the minimum number of home
we have an example i think that was the
clear questions
the next one is the quality of service
you may have some criteria in your
network for example
latency or delay or throughput or
packet loss or whatever is important in
your network
so sensor networks uh performing the
target detection for example and
tracking will
require low end-to-end uh delay when you
want to track something i think delay is
the most important thing
whereas for um
data in intensive networks like when you
want to for example send some video
then high throughput is really important
so depends on your application you
should prioritize your
criteria then you have a time sensitive
uh
data like tracking so designing
you need to have this quality of service
to minimize latency
so what's the next one uh robotness
is basically in this scenario link
quality or link is stability is really
important you don't want to lose any
lunch
so it doesn't matter how much is the
cost of keeping that link
stability is really important for you
and usually you are asked to focus on
one
specific metric for example when you
focusing on minimum pop
robotness may not be your criteria or
quality of service
and but in more complicated scenarios as
a designer engineer
you will need to address multiple
metrics simultaneously
so continuing our writing matrix energy
is
one of the main constraints in wireless
natural networks so there are many
metrics around the energy efficiency
and one one metric will be minimum
energy consumed per packet
so the minimum energy consumption packet
basically
aims to minimize the total amount of
energy
ex for to propagate
sensor data from let's say a to b so the
main
criteria is to minimize the
consume energy
maximum time to network partition
and i'll be showing this in my next
slide an example but
just briefly explain you and imagine you
have uh
you have a large network and you have
some
stop networks and these sub networks are
connected together through some notes
so you should be very careful about how
much traffic will be passed through the
network
through the node which is connected to
subsections because if you pass too much
traffic to that
node to that link then if the battery
you become depleted then you will
basically if you
lose that sensor you basically uh
and that network will be a partition so
we don't want to
see this problem we want to have all our
network connected
so when you pass traffic to a specific
node you should
see if that node is playing a critical
role
such as connecting to softness you
shouldn't pass too much traffic
to that specific node so our challenge
is to reduce the energy consumption
on nodes which are uh
essential to maintaining a network
so what's the next one the next one is
minimum medium minimized variation in
node
power levels in this scenario all nodes
within the network are considered
equally important so we want to have a
even even distribution among our sensor
nodes
we want to have uh to
use their energy at the same time so
this means the traffic
communication everything everyone knows
to be equal so because they are
uh the aim of the goal of this metric is
to maximize the long term of the entire
network
so this is another metric the
next one is maximum average energy
capacity you may see the names are a bit
confusing but within the example you see
it's not really confusing
it is really easy maximum average energy
capacity
whenever you see this energy capacity
think about battery charge
each sensor has a battery so we want to
maximize the
battery level so the other way how we
can
minimize the energy consumption
and the last one maximum minimum energy
capacity
this one is a bit uh confusing
maximum minimum energy capacity so uh
basically
think about we have different routes
different paths in our network wireless
sensor network
you should select the pass with the
largest minimum energy capacity
each pass has a minimum energy capacity
has the minimum
amount of battery for example it can be
one two three whatever
so you should select a pass when this is
your message select a pass with the
uh largest minimum energy capacity for
example if the minimum capacity
or minimum battery level in your
wirelessness or network is one you
should avoid
that pass you should you should select a
path which has a minimum level of above
this lecture
we have this in our example this is
basically to protect
low capacity notes from premature
exploration
um receiving a notification here let me
turn off my video for now so we can
dedicate the entire
bandwidth
so all the time trying again and
as i think probably at this time
there are so many other users so
could you see my screen yes we can see
it
great let me bring this
uh chat box here but if you have any
questions because i may not be able to
check our
chat box frequently if you have any
questions just
feel free to ask me
so these are the main metrics
uh for energy uh i'll prepare
an example here to cover most of this
and i would like you to
if you have it if you like to think
about it or
uh if you have some answers please uh
feel free to share in the chat box i
just want to give you a few minutes to
think about this
because this would be a
question in your quiz uh
i think this is one of the most
important topic in uh
routing energy is really important so
think about it because if you learn it
here
you will never uh forget
so uh here is the simpler wireless
sensor network these are this is our
source this is our destination and we
have
different hops here and number
along links here you see for example one
here
along this link link you will see two
here for example we have one
numbers on top of uh dash lines these
are
cost for transmission over link if you
want to send your packet from source to
this node c you need to pay two
this is the cost for transmission and
numbers in parentheses here these
numbers uh
here for example five one this is
remaining energy capacity or on the
other
uh i just wanted to simplify here
consider as battery level so this is for
example this
sensor has more battery charge compared
to this one
is it clear
[Music]
yes it's good okay great now
we move on to our questions
so this is a transmission cost this is
battery level
i have it here again for your reference
so first question is to find the route
that minimizes the packets energy
overheads or minimizes the cost
so we dis uh we mentioned that this is
these are the cost for transmission
so find a route from source to
destination to address this criteria
so don't think about other messages
don't think about minimum hopes or
uh other uh criteria will be discussed
just focus on
packets energy over how by using the
first one by passing through a d
g let me also bring a
pen and paper
spider should do some rough calculation
from source to destination uh
which route can minimize the packet's
energy
okay any other answers you can also
put in the uh chat box or bluetooth
okay let's see the answer and
from source we go to a c g
yep perfect was it difficult for
students who didn't answer
i think it was pretty clear
okay the second one find the minimum hop
route
so don't forget about other metrics from
source to destination how we can
get through this with the limited stops
any other answers this one i think this
is the
easiest one because you just need to
count the number
of pops
so from source we go to b
and g and then this is our destination
so the third one find a note whose
removal will cause a network to
partition
this is what i mentioned a critical note
c
b b any any
for some reason i can't see uh checkbox
here
okay okay
yep well done
i'm sorry can you explain why it's dng
let me see what's the answer first
yeah you've seen it because i'll change
my slides to
presentation view
so
[Music]
so a critical node is d because if
this battery becomes depleted
then nodes f i and j would not be
reachable from
any other node in the network so this
would basically create network uh
partitioning from here to this part so
we have two isolated
subnets is it clear
[Music]
okay uh whereas for example if you lose
this one
which one you mentioned yeah i was
thinking g
no it's i know xd so you don't uh
have access so this is really important
as a designer you
uh offload traffic through this knot
because this node is really critical
uh four find a route you have the
largest total capacity
total capacity just to simplify for
yourself
is the battery level and these are the
values in practice
so find a route from source to
destination which has the largest
battery level total capacity
let's see
other options
can we repeat the hope like uh if we go
from a to d
and f g i and again d to g to
destination
you should uh add all these values in
front
and then compare them to c b switch
routes is
and the good thing is it's not actually
complicated for this question
you just need to address the largest
total capacity
uh usually when i ask this question
i say address this large social capacity
and at the same time avoid unnecessarily
hops
so if you have two rods both of them can
bring this largest total capacity but
one of them has four hops the other one
has three hearts you should go with the
three house because
you don't necessarily want to go with
the largest uh with more hops
uh but this is not mentioned here so
basically
you can go through c which has five and
then
e and then h and destination
if you go through any other hubs i think
the value is less than this
c e h
last one select a pass with the largest
minimum
energy capacity this is a bit confusing
i heard from
other students former students uh see
find the minimum capacity uh for example
you have one here you have two
don't worry about these large values
we're talking about minimum values one
and two so the minimum capacity
around uh find a route which has the
largest minimum energy capacity
so basically just as if you have a quick
look minimum capacity can be one
so we have many routes which has uh
which have uh nodes with minimum
capacity of one
yeah so a d g of course so then
the aim of this question is to avoid
minimum energy capacity is to avoid
routes with one
bg
who said this
i can't uh what much uh chatbox
okay great bg perfect yes
now i can see two chat box here yes well
done ali
[Music]
and the other students yeah now i can
see the chat box and
i can see your correct answers
yes bg
so that's it uh
do you have any questions for this one
i can't read your question here motion
can we
actually i have a question what
um so for the first
can you can hear me yes for the first
one
for the first question yeah um so
we have to find the minimum
energy of our heads right yes
for the parentheses no
overheads means see let's go
basically overheads means minimize the
cost uh
and cost is really related to number of
costs for transmission basically these
are values the overlink
over this thing over this dashed lines
okay
so whenever you hear anything about cost
basically it means the transmission cost
and this transmission console values
along the link and everything will be
explained in the question if you receive
this question
number in practice basically is only
about energy level battery level
okay thank you i think the
most important part is just not to get
confused
then read the question carefully and
i think it's really easy uh i may
probably prepare another example more
complicated very important
next time so we can go through this
again together
and probably the complexity will happen
when you have a
then you need to address multiple
metrics uh
simultaneously i'm sorry
uh yeah go ahead oh thanks
i'm just going to ask in this example we
are talking about the transmission cost
but
in real sort of other examples does
the cost of discovering the path
get involved with the routing metrics
yes yeah okay
that's that's really important thanks
ali
this was a very simple example just for
training teaching purposes yeah but what
you mentioned is really important
and we're going to cover them in some
examples not uh
with quantify values but quality we will
cover this in more examples finding
drought and the
time basically linux uh cost you need to
spend for
uh to run discovery mechanism and to
advertise your
uh request uh advertiser data and then
send and receive requests is really
important
okay thank you what was the other
question
all right the other question is about
for the question five select the largest
minimum
energy capacity the purpose of that
isn't it just
uh to find out the paths that
may consider the minimum energy capacity
so we can avoid it
or what's the purpose of that
yes that's a very good question the main
purpose
is this one is to protect low capacity
nodes from premature exploration
when you have low capacity noise with
low level
battery or energy capacity we want to
offload traffic as much as possible to
protect them from premature exploration
so this is the main target of maximum
minimum energy capacity we want to
maximize the
energy capacity by avoiding uh
traveling through nodes with minimum
energy
all right cool the other questions is
for the topology here is do we just
automatically
discard the um fgi part
to just assume they never were going to
work
if what do you mean yeah
it's just j also have a you know energy
capacity of one
so do we consider j as well or
we just think that the shortest path is
only
what we are thinking select the password
this is for
number five yes yeah number five so i
was thinking about
adf then just go through the
go through the loop and then come out
[Music]
you can go through e again e also has
only one energy capacity
what's wrong with that yeah i'm just
thinking
that was a good question there are many
issues with this one but
they are not mentioned in this question
so
by the way there would be multiple
answers for this question or selected
the most uh
the efficient one the optimum one but
there might be some other routes
uh to address these five questions
because i didn't combine them with
different criteria for example i didn't
mention
do this and also at the same time avoid
unnecessary hopes
or so let me see if there are dimensions
can satisfy this one or not
so uh
minimum and so
minimum capacity uh along the route is
selected
is true okay so you
you basically go through source to b
which has a minimum capacity of
two and then g which has a gain battery
level of two
so the minimum capacity along this route
is two
which is larger than the minimum
capacities of all
other possible routes if you go through
this way again you should pass through
this node which has a capacity of one
so basically we want to avoid the nodes
with
low values with low energy values
yeah so for that reason we didn't choose
to go to
c e h because it has a capacity of one
yes
if yes because uh very very simple
see yes because we need to pass our
uh data through e
and e we may cause uh a premature
exploration for e because it doesn't
have that much energy
yeah okay thanks well see just have a
quick look at
all other links a minimum value is one
so try to avoid one
so the only link which help you to try
to avoid that uh
one is this one
all right thanks because i was thinking
the other way around to get
as much one as possible and to avoid
that
sorry about that no but that's good
that's what we're exploring different
things
and if i want to make it a bit
tricky or may ask you for example for
different questions i may ask you to
find the minimum home
browse and at the same time make sure we
our network will not go through this
network partitioning uh so you need to
consider for example two criteria
uh but uh uh for
for now i just wanted to focus on one
specific criteria
for the last one uh the easiest way you
just not to get confused
find the minimum battery level and
minimum value in front
and try to avoid that one
so can we move on to the
next topic yeah thank you
okay my pleasure so flooding writing
today we're going to focus on flat base
routing
as i mentioned briefly all nodes play
same role
so flooding routing is a
is a old and simple strategy to
propagate information
into a network or to reach a node
at an unknown location basically you
want to flood the network with some
information
imagine you want to contact me at fuit
our faculty you don't have my email
address what can you do you don't have
my email address but you know i'm
working in the faculty of it and
engineering you can send your email to
fuit all staff there is an email address
which called fuit all the stuff please
don't
use this but basically you float the
entire network in our faculty
and i will definitely receive your email
so this is where you don't have you have
an unknown location
or another scenario where you use this
flooding you have an information you
want to broadcast it to your network
so you send an email to everyone so in
for both scenarios we use bloody
so the destination is guaranteed to
receive the
data and
does attack in cyber security
it can be yes that's uh that's a good
point base
in our security lectures we discuss
about this as well
so this is another way to uh
uh disseminate the wires for example in
your in the network
but uh we today we're just discussing
about the positive so it's
sending useful information to everyone
and so you plot that network every
packet is sent
on every outgoing line
and i'll have a very simple animation
here
just to show you how this flooding can
work so this is a packet
and you receive it you want to to use
this flooding routing
basically you send it to your neighbors
and then the neighbors will again
broadcasting and sending to other
neighbors
so this node here receives information
from this neighbor as well as this one
because
every packet is sent out on every
outgoing line
expect that one is arrived at so this uh
node here will send it to these two
nodes
this node here will send packets to this
node and listen
so as a result uh this node here
receives package series from this
neighbor from this neighbor and this one
is it clear i'm not going to ask you to
count the number of packets in any
question but you see how the flooding uh
works in wirelessness or network
basically you had one packet here you
wanted to see
the send it to this destination let's
say but
because you wanted to flood the entire
network or you didn't have the exact
location of this destination
you use flooding so eventually this
destination received the packet but not
one time
three times so you may you may see what
are the
advantages and disadvantages main
advantages is the destination is
guaranteed to receive the data
but there are some disadvantages we will
discuss uh shortly
so every sensor node re-broadcast sensor
data to
all of its neighbors it is very simple
and reliable technique it is reliable
because every node will definitely
receive information
but it will cause heavy traffic and
inclusion in your virus and soon as well
there is a strategy we can use it's
called maximum hub
counts we basically can use this one to
eliminate duplicates
so we we have a like a maximum uh
hop counter so we say then you reach
this number of hops
don't send more don't broadcast small to
other nodes so we have like a stop point
at some stage
but it should be set large enough this
maximum pop count
so that every intended receiver can be
reached and also it should be small
enough to ensure that packets don't
travel too long
in the network so it is really important
to
define a good value for this
maximum pub counts
so let's see what are the challenges
with flooding uh
implosion uh obviously is one problem
because nodes will re-broadcast even the
neighbors already have a copy
so we have an implosion uh overlap
sensor data contains redundant
information or have different
slots to go through everyone each of
these
challenges and the resource blindness
basically you send information to nodes
without
asking if they have resource contracts
uh constraints or not
so we call it resource blindness first
one implosion implosion challenge
you have this uh note here uh
a it sends some packets to b and then
to c and then b and c again uh returns
means this title is to d
so d will receive x a couple of times
from both
neighbors so notes will be broadcast
then even then neighbors already have a
copy
so we call it enclosure another one is
overlap
imagine you have two nodes here a and b
and this is their
data so they may have some overlaps in
there that already exist
so this r is a like a
common data between a and b
a sends information to c uh information
uh or q and r and b also sr
so we have this command section here b
also sent for understands information to
c
due to this overlap basically c receives
all two charms
so this is another challenge
so sensor data may contain some
redundant information and as a result of
flooding this c receives or two terms
what's the chat about the problem we
have limited storage capacity and
basically we may kill this sensor
by sending too much information
unnecessarily information
and the last challenge with plotting is
resource blindness
nodes don't modify their activities
based on the amount of energy available
to them
you send information to nodes and those
nodes may not
have enough energy to receive your
information
basically imagine you have a limited
battery on your mobile phone
and your friend keeps sending you some
text
and you you may not be interested to
receive those texts but receiving those
takes uh
unintentionally may decrease your
battery on your mobile phone
any questions okay
this was quite straightforward so in
terms of topology
and we had a flat base hierarchical
based on location based
in flat space just a bit africa we
all knows are
doing same thing and they have basically
the same functionality
whereas in hierarchical base uh
different nodes play
different roles and location base we're
going to
focus on these next sessions
so uh just focusing on flat base where
all nodes
are uh working equally
we have an active quarry in
flat based routing we call it aquar and
there are
noise papers also if you are interested
in
research aspect of this mechanism
you can i can share some papers with you
basically in this scenario uh
you can see the network as a distributed
database
when you have a complex question you can
get answer
through multiple sensors
rather than sending to one specific
sensor for you and set different sensors
collaboratively can
uh help you to find answer so
uh the
basic session uh sends a query
and this query will be forwarded by each
node
the nodes which basically receive that
question each node tries to respond to
the query as much as they can
and then they send it to the neighbors
to also to have some contributions to
the answer
query is returned back to the sender
who initiated this question as a
completed response when is completed
especially when we have complex uh
queries then
this active query mechanism can help us
to find the
response i'll have a
have an animation here to show you
this a core do you have any questions
so here we have a sink
uh which has a question and we have
multiple nodes here
and these nodes can work collaboratively
to answer
a complicated question so here is the
thing
and it has the question so the basis
session or this thing here
sends a query which is then forwarded by
each node
receiving the query so
these nodes contributed partially to
answer the question but the question is
still active it's not completed when
it's completed the
color will return to yellow so what they
do they pass it to other neighbors
to have more contributions
so during this each note tries to
respond to the query
partially by using the pre-cache
information
and then they forward it to other
neighbors
so they do it as long as they find a
complete answer and see you can see
they they partially contribute to the
answer
and now here the response is completed
so it will be sent back
all the way to the sink
any questions
so uh
whenever you have a complex uh query
you can see this wireless sensor network
as a
database distributed database so you can
get
course answers partially from different
nodes
so in terms of operation type uh
we have negotiation base we have uh
the in negotiation based routing
basically we have uh
we want to eliminate redundant data
transmission so we
negotiate with notes to see if they are
interested or not to receive the
information before sending information
so we have some sort of negotiation
before sending or receiving
any data let me see if we can take a
is this
uh so let's take five minutes breaks
because we want to jump to another
topic from this one so let's take
five to seven minutes break
it's five four and then we can come back
again
and continue on operation time
it's
so
[Music]
oh
um
so
ready could you take a couple of minutes
break
i just want to i don't want to make the
lecture boring for you
feel free to grab your coffee
tea i have to hear and it's
late afternoon it's good to try to enjoy
the lecture as well
guys
so shall we move on
well i just this is just a suggestion
you know attending the
class or uh lab is not
mandatory at all but you will see
probably
uh after our quiz one you will see if
you attend the class
and just review the lecture notes you
can
get good mark and also same thing for
your lab if you join the class and ask
your questions
the project will be really enjoyable and
easy for you so
uh attending class is basically to help
you to understand the material and also
to save you some time
so you don't need to study alone uh
for a long number of hours you just need
to join the class and
get involved with other students
so let's move on
so in negotiation-based writing we
basically
we want to negotiate to
reduce redundancy and
we have also another operational toy
it's called the multi-pass routing
basically this is to increase fall
tolerance as i mentioned briefly we want
to have multiple
routes simultaneously so if you
lose one drought due to security issue
or due to
security attacks or due to a
battery problem so still we have backup
plan
the other one is query based routing is
basically we call it query based because
query transmitted
and the data is sent back so it
in this scenario question will be
initiated by
sync or basis station and then other
sensors will contribute so we call it
query base and the sctv
this routing protocol is a receiver
initiated
and then other sensor nodes will
send their reply to the receiver
and what else another one was the
quality of service the goal of quality
service
based routing is to satisfy certain
quality of service metrics this can be
low energy low latency low packet loss
whatever but we basically want to
address some criteria
core and base routing is basically
uh designed to perform only minimum
amount of
processing so in terms of the first one
see negotiation based routing we have
multiple categories and
so uh sensor protocol for information
negotiation we call this thing
uh don't worry about memorizing acronyms
uh
this is just for your information but
it's good to familiar
make yourself familiar with some icons
so if you see them somewhere else you
know
you can remember the content
and also we have directed diffusion and
rumor routing so now just focus on
sensor
protocol for information negotiations
it's a family of negotiation-based data
centric and flooding
protocols you remember flooding
in this protocol we basically send
metadata
to neighbors and then uh
we send data actual later if required so
metadata is uh
smaller than actual data so this would
basically
this would avoid redundant information
and also to minimize traffic
and if the since the receiver was not
interested in that ratio basically we
don't send the nato and
we can increase the network lifetime so
we don't send or receive unnecessary
information
uh and
what's this one flat based routing
protocol and
spin advantages we can address all
challenges of flooding by negotiations
so we can address implosion because
nodes negotiate before data transmission
so we can minimize implosion as well as
overlaps because
again we have negotiation and then
resource blindness will be also
addressed because resource manager
keeps track of actual resource
consumption and we can adopt ourselves
to
based on our remaining energy so we can
minimize unnecessary communication
based on the level of energy
available in our network
and in terms of slim uh just to add more
details
uh i mentioned briefly we use the
methodology
and if x this smallix here describes the
method
data for some sensor data the actual
data is this uh uh capitalist
so in terms of source method data is
smaller than actual data so this is the
whole concept we don't want to send the
actual data
before having some sort of negotiation
if two pieces of sensor data differ
their method
data should be also uh different
so metadata long story short should
represent the data
we have different protocols under spin
we have
spin point to point we have spin energy
conversation
sorry conservation we have a spin
broadcast transmission
we have been reliable version of
broadcast transmission so
again don't worry about acronyms don't
try to memorize anything in this subject
have different slice to go through
each of these protocols so
you can basically try to learn the
concept so for a spin point to point
it is optimized for networks using
point-to-point transmission
uh media so two nodes communicate
directly with each other without any
interference
we can use flooding using a three-way
handshake basically flooding to
see to advertise our data or metadata
node a advertised newly available data
using
adb message advertisement message
containing metadata because we are in
spin protocol we don't want to send
actual data we want to minimize
uh traffic minimize implosion redundancy
and resource blindness so we just at the
first stage we just send
metadata neighbors b
c d e here in this diagram check if this
advertise the
data is interesting to them or not if
yes then they send this request message
apparently c and e were not interested
in this method data so only b
and d uh send this request message to a
so a send actual data now this term is
not method
so it's actual data to nodes that
responded
b and e a b and d any questions
no okay and next one spin
energy conservation this is a variation
of spin
point to point protocol and basically
we have energy conservation to the
uh in on top of a point-to-point
protocol
notes participate in the three-way
handshake this
trivia handshake we have here
advertising sending requests and also
sending data
only if they have enough energy to
complete all the stages
uh see at this stage a sends a method to
advertise this information
he must be interested to receive this
information so
it should check his energy level battery
levels see if it has enough energy to
complete all these three
levels to send this request and also to
receive data
if not we will not send this request
message
to a so
we have a threshold uh defined in our
network
energy threshold nodes check their
energy
compared to this threshold if they are
blue threshold they will not
participate in three way handshake
in energy conservation protocol
any questions
no great thanks for confirmation thanks
[Music]
next one uh spin broadcast transmission
so in broadcast transmission every
message sent by sender will be received
by all nodes within the sender's radio
range
each node imagine a sensor has a
has an antenna and they have they can
cover specific
range uh we call it radio range this
dive circuit here
so only nodes between this radio range
can receive this uh information
by sender nodes can coordinate the
resource conserving a force more
effectively
because they are able to overhear all
transactions between their radio range
how does it work imagine
uh we are in a classroom uh
it's better to imagine like a
face-to-face classroom
so everyone can hear me in that room
because we are in a classroom
and you are all within my voice range
so whatever i say you can hear me you
have a question
uh you can wait to see if other
students have the same question or not
if they ask same question you can save
your energy
more effectively and you don't need to
ask me the same question
so this is how we can conserve energy
when you are in the same radial range
and the other thing not outside this
radio range will not hear us
so this will be basically dedicated to
this radio range so other nodes
will save their energy because they they
will not receive
our information so their passion will
not be depleted
uh another this was okay
continuing on that one broadcast
transmission
and we use a three-way handshake with
three differences compared to a spin
point to point all nodes within a
sender's transmission
range will receive a copy of the
advertisement message
see all nodes this sender advertises
as information and all these nodes
within radio range will receive this
advertisement when they receive this
advertisement
they set a timer uh let's say
one minute after a timer expires when a
node
overhears the request message uh then
the node cancel this timer if they don't
uh overhears this
request message then they can send their
request to the sender
this is this similar to example i'll
mention
you wait you have a question in your
mind you wait for uh
five minutes if you hear the same
question from another student and
obviously my answer then you will cancel
your question
and you save your energy if not after
the timer your time
expires then you can raise your question
and ask it
and in that scenario other nodes other
students will wait
and if they receive same they
required information they will cancel
their question so this way we can
maximize the network lifetime
the number of transmission can be
significantly reduced
is it clear any questions uh will the
timer be different
for each node or they're the same uh
depends depends on local rules in the
network
how you want to make it more complicated
or not but
usually it is easier to make same timer
for
uh everyone for all notes
but these are some local rules we can
define in our
for example if some nodes have more
critical missions they are for example
close to basic station or they have
other critical missions like cluster
heads
they may have a like
their timer would be different to other
nodes they may not be really patient
they
just wait for a couple of minutes to see
if they get information or not whereas
other nodes can wait longer
and so this can be different based on
the nets for topology but
as a default we can set a timer for
everyone
same thing main
main advantage of this protocol is
all nodes are between this
radio range can hear it doesn't matter
if you are very close to sense uh
sender or not you will hear it so you
can
conserve your energy if you
[Music]
receive your requested data by someone
else
right just if the timer are all the same
if all the notes don't have the
information and they all require this
won't the channel be like overflowed by
like uh tens of requirements
messages yes it this is the case yes it
will be over
loaded so and they may
have different timers based on
just to have some
minimal overlaps
all right thanks depends depends on
imagine for example you have a question
you you
it might be very urgent for you so you
may set your timer one second
but as the your friend also has a
question this information is probably
secondary for for him so he may set our
timer at five so depends on how
sensitive this information because
you've already received advertised
data you have received metadata you know
how important is for you to receive this
data and how much you can date then
obviously timer is different
uh but then
it's not like an ideal scenario there
might be some
requests at the same time this is like
for example
now in zoom class some of you may answer
the same question
at the same time because you don't know
who is going to ask
and at the same time you can unmute
yourself asking
so i mean it's not an ideal scenario
there might be some
implosion but it is minimized because
you you can overhear each other
all right got it thanks you're welcome
and another thing from
a sender perspective not receiver the
advertiser
transmit the advertised data to the
broadcast address
only once so if you ask me a question
like now
as you did i answer it to everyone so
if at the same time i receive requests
from other students
or will ignore it because the same same
question i will just answer it one time
so i can save my energy as well as a
sender and
you as a receiver can save your energy
because if someone else asks you a
question
same question you don't need to send it
so it's a two-way
saving energy for both sender and
receiver so we can basically
minimize redundancy and duplicate
information
sorry i got another question that since
if for example if i ask the question and
you answered it
and some students already know for the
um
well it's just like the some sensor
already have that information
and if you just send it up over again
when they have
like two of the copy of that yeah that's
also a waste of resources as well
exactly this is based off resources but
only limited to sensors who are between
my radio range this is why we have
we define multiple radio range for
different
senders so we don't have too much
overlaps so imagine there are 100 nodes
also here they will not
hear us they would not get information
if they already had
so we have the limited number of nodes
here so there is uh there are some
advantages and disadvantages the
advantage is yes
if they are interested they will receive
information but if they are not
interested they will also again receive
information
but a good thing is actually we have a
limited radio range for each sense
and not if on when we are in the
classroom
only 50 students in my classroom can
hear me not the entire faculty
do they store the information they read
like if they got information that
they're not interested in
do they still store it yes this is
exactly
a very good question this is like for
example some students in the class now
they may not be interested in the
question
you are asking or the answer i'm giving
you but they are here
they can overhear us and there
might be some unnecessary information
they're receiving because
they are in our radio range as i said
there are some advantages
this is a disadvantage if you are not
interested anyway because you are in the
radio range you will receive
okay got it no uh it just
and this is this is the case we uh
categorize sensors in this radio range
who most probably
are interested to have this kind of
communications
uh the other one let's see okay this is
what i think this is the last one for
spin
reliable version of uh broadcasting
not keep track of overhead yes after the
question
like uh you said that every every sensor
in the radio range will get the
signal right like if you want to
not give them one uh sorry for yourself
i can't hear you could you
[Laughter]
yes but in the previous figure we see
that
uh whosoever requested it will get
dances only
yes because this is the thing that was
was energy
conservation uh protocol this was was
broadcast transmission
so you see even from the name we have
like a flavor of broadcasting in this
protocol whereas in the other one
energy was our main criteria but in this
one
energy is not our main criteria and
basically we can
categorize sensors in this um portable
then
we most probably you want to broadcast
some information to them
so if energy is your main metric then
you should go with this protocol
energy conservation so you only
communicate with the sensors who are
interested
in the information but for this one for
example you want to
send an alarm like um
something happens to the faculty like
hazers or something so you you would
prefer to broadcast them so
anyone in the radio range in our faculty
will receive an alarm then
for example is fire alarm or something
so we don't care about energy that's
that much nature of this one is more
about broadcasting
so this is main criteria whereas for the
other one yes energy
but at the same time broadcasting is
import important
because it is part of negotiation-based
protocol
we can address energy as much as we can
but
energy is not the main criteria in
broadcast transmission
[Music]
so and the energy saving is basically
through this
setting timers and also
having that specific radio range so we
can save energy in this case
but uh compared to other techniques the
main concept of this is broadcasting
not energy statement for example this
one is mainly focusing on reliable
transmission and energy and broadcasting
and not be the first criteria so in this
protocol reliable version we
then not broadcast requests to
re-request
data if you don't receive the
information after
a certain amount of time this is
basically to add another layer of uh
reliability to our protocol we set
another
uh inter timeout interval
and if we don't receive the message by
that time
we assume either the request or the data
did not arrive
so we re-request our request
and and this
is if you have any question feel free to
ask
this was just to make sure this uh
reliable version just to make sure
our event this notes here
when they request information they
receive it so if they don't receive it
at a certain amount of
time then we they can send their
requests again
so we mentioned about this three-way
handshake
protocol multiple times i have a very
simple animation here
it seems very simple this uh
concept but at the same time it is
really important so there are
some details i want to show you in this
animation
uh basically for spin negotiation-based
protocol we have the three-way handshake
and this is the whole concept behind
negotiation we want to have this
handshake to make sure our receiver is
interested to
receive the information so a uh
yellow information here a has some
data and b blue also has some
information
so a advertised information
and through this advertisement and it's
the method they saw
so it is uh much more smaller than the
actual data
so send advertising formation to be
a historic neighbor to see if he is
interested or not
and then b sends a request message so b
is interested in yellow information
see this color as well because it's
going to change
shortly so now this is the actual data
which is uh
larger than metadata we've done
negotiation
b was interested and a sends actual data
now b receives a yellow data from a
and combining which aggregated which is
on data
now b information is the green is a
combination of
yellow and blue next step
b has new information so it's going to
through this advertisement
mode atletico is it's a new information
to
all uh neighbors uh
green color combination of blue and
a yellow so
what's next nodes who are interested in
this uh
information will send requests and the
next
stage b will send information to
those who were interested you see here
this
data green data here is smaller than
other data
you know why why this one is smaller
than
[Music]
other guys oh
because it's your favorite song that uh
it's just getting the beast
see could you repeat again
actually have its own data it's just
getting the data from b
excellent yes see you notice this green
was basically a combination of
yellow and blue in the first step so
this screen already had part of a
information so a was not interested in
redundant information and
only asked for new information which
was not actually included in a so this
data is smaller than this data for other
nodes
so um so one thing was this
color change so when we receive
information we aggregated with our own
information
so this screen was basically a
combination of uh
two new our existing information plus
new information
any questions so at this
negotiation based uh protocol is
basically very effective
and and data sizes are large
so we negotiate in advance
and we don't send actual data actual
large data without any discussion
another uh protocol in flat based
routing is
a direct diffusion and i want to make it
very brief
in terms of direct diffusion basically
nodes request data by sending interest
for name data so we have we can
categorize our
data and then our nodes can show the
interest they say okay they are
interested in this kind of category for
example
for vehicle tracking application we have
we have
we can define a type for vehicle we can
define
intervals duration for example duration
to perform the task
or interval to send the data let's say
every 20 milliseconds
and then we basically advertise this
data by
through this value attribute value pairs
so we name our information we
have some description like this so
application is described using the
naming approach so we call it directed
diffusion and we have it again source
and destination interested
note it can be sync or basic station
here
uh frequently sends interest to
neighbors these
neighbors and they say okay i'm
interested in this kind of information
about uh for example my previous slide
and they will re-broadcast this
information so
until they get to the information now in
this case we have a source who
has the information and the source will
send the
requested information and through the
optimum link here it can send it through
this way but
this way is more efficient so source
will send information through sync
it is somehow query based so stink
initiates the information
and this we call it many direct
diffusion because we have this naming
approach
we define our queries based on
some naming criteria some specific
description
[Music]
so this is all about we can save energy
and darker diffusion
by selecting the optimal uh return pass
so when we re when we broadcast our
queries we create multiple paths and
then on
on the way back the information will be
sent through the optimal
route so this way we can save energy
and just a brief comparison between
negotiation based and directly diffusion
interest can be queries or requests are
issued on demand
by the sink instead of source
advertisement in the spin
uh the source field like that handshake
i showed you
this um we
the source will advertise its
information whereas here in
dark diffusion uh requests will be
issued by
on demand by the sink
and as i mentioned we call it a query
base as well
and it's not really a good solution for
networks with
uh need for continuous data transfers
because it would be
for example like in environmental
monitoring if you want to ask what's the
uh let's say uh conclusion right now and
if you want to send this
every milliseconds then it would be
heavy it may cause heavy traffic in our
network
so it's not a good option for
continuous data transfer
uh the other thing for direct diffusion
communication is all neighbor to
neighbor
so removing the need for addressing and
allowing nodes to perform aggregation
and caching
see here communication is all neighbor
to neighbor so we don't need to
have like a table of addresses of all
these nodes because we just need to know
our
direct neighbor and then we send it to
our neighbor and then the neighbor will
pass it to the other neighbor until we
get to the source
so this will again reduce energy
consumption
because we don't need to send our this
communication is neighbor to neighbor we
don't need to travel long distance to
get to the
source
last one in flat based routing last
portable is the
rumor routing it's basically a variation
of uh directed diffusion
and this uh protocol attempts to combine
characteristics of
even flooding and also
query production we discuss about
plotting briefly and we discussed about
query based routing now this is a
combination of
uh walls basically in this scenario
nodes
have two data structures
list of their neighbors and also even
table
i think i'll have another slide to
explain this in details
uh okay here see if you have uh
this is examples here we have node e er
node e reports new event is called
uh evon using an agent and asian
basically
is a packet traveling uh
throughout the network to propagate
information it's like a messenger
so this even travels through the network
to propagate this
new information about this new event
and so a receiver
a agent for this node g here
uh so a a receives information
see this one this node here receives the
information
through this event at through this
g so now it has you can update this
table
so basically in the first scenario we
have uh
distance to e1 was 4 true
node b 1 2 3 4. now a receives new
information
uh through this way through g so
a can update this tables uh see
i'll mention here we have an even table
so a
of this is even table based on this new
event so basically distance from e1 is
three through this way g f
e so we have we have we found a
shorter pass and a will uh updated in
this
event table rather than four uh hops
through b
a can send or receive information from e
through g
so this is the role of e er the
role of rumor routine then there is an
event
this event can travel
through the network and propagate new
information basically to optimize the
routes
to minimize the number of hops and
to maintain energy efficiency
any questions
[Music]
um excuse me yes so how does
e1 decide on which node to send its new
information to so
for this example it was a so what if
um like how does it decide to send it to
a
there's no like decision making
mechanism it just it's like a messenger
as i say
travels throughout the network and just
inform everyone about uh
updates about current trust for example
at that time this route was not created
but now it is created there is a pass
from a
to e through g and he just send it
through the messenger so this even as an
event
travels around around the network and
propagate this information
so it's not a basically a decision just
propagating new information
updates so it was chosen randomly
yes okay thank you
what time is it okay we have
uh 15 minutes i will do my best to wrap
up everything uh
quickly so in terms of uh rumor routine
just to conclude
and basically you want to keep balance
between
quarry and event flooding query plotting
may be too expensive with large
query or event ratio and even flooding
may be also too expensive and we have
too many uh events so with rumor routine
basically we propagate queries directly
to nodes that's in
events of interest so this one already
had
e1 in the table so we don't send it to
everyone probably
but that somehow answers your question
it is random but
in the first step but then you have this
table here
in the second time when you want to send
an event you only send it to
nodes who already had some history with
that event and
who we know that might be interested and
this is why we call it rumor
we here heard something we know that
node is interested
and we send it to the node which one is
interested
uh latency is obviously secondary
concern in
rumor routing because we don't send it
right to the point uh
we send it through we basically
propagate these events throughout the
network so it may cause some latency
and then disadvantages this event table
could be very large and that would
consume
depends on the number of events then
that would consume storage capacity of
the node if
too many events happen in the network
then
this table would be very large i mean
events may we can refer events to
changes in the network if there are too
many updates in the network in terms of
new laws
and then and this events table would be
very large
so this is not this uh rumor routine
would be too expensive
and number of events are really large
any questions
so oh that was actually our last slide
uh so depends on the application
we can select different uh
routing algorithms today we just focus
on
flat based routing and different type of
operations
there is a large number of routing
algorithms but
none of them is not really optimal
so we can customize them based on the
application we can say
this routing is the best we should
consider applications more different
messages for example today we
saw that examples together different
energy metrics
so not necessarily one algorithm is an
option
we can we should have like a trade-off
so we briefly
uh discussed about this not really
briefly but we discuss about flat base
there are more materials for flat space
but
it's behind the scope of this object so
we just leave it
to this for now next week we're gonna
focus on hierarchical base routing
we also discussed about different type
and in our final session for routing we
will
discuss about reactive proactive and
hybrid routing and also
job-based routing location-based routing
any questions
questions
yeah will you release some of the like
sample quiz questions to us
so as we know how to do the revision
even better uh i don't have any sample
let me for example
uh the examples we discussed today could
be a sample
and the uh there are many
uh similar uh questions which can be
used as sample in your
uh textbook uh i think writing you know
i can double check out
i think it was chapter seven
uh correct me from wrong in your in the
recommended textbook
at the end of the chapter there are many
questions which can be
can be considered as samples
but as i mentioned if you just
attend the class and get involved with
these examples or prepare every week
and just review lecture notes you will
see the
quiz is basically based on these
materials
and is uh beyond
what i'm covering in the class
question on this team out of available
options for routing do we need to know
all of them
or are there certain ones that are sort
of important for the project and
that are commonly used in the industry
and what will be the best way to figure
those out uh find those out basically
uh that's a good question
my my mission is to uh
increase your knowledge as much as you
can in this domain but of course you
need to be focused on a specific
protocols for based on your application
it's good to know everything
and i summarize the most important
things for this subject there are other
uh protocols also but i just focus on
the
most popular ones but again as we go and
not necessarily for this project
we may not need to select any type of
routing specific routing we don't you
don't need to focus on that one but for
your future projects
based on the application you should
select one of them
we we have a session dedicated to
industry
lecture we can this is a good question
also to ask our industry partners what
are in reality what what they use
but uh wait for another uh probably one
two weeks we discussed about more
advanced routing portables especially in
um
[Music]
when you have a large scale network uh
we can discuss about more topologies in
reality we can adopt them
but yes of course not necessarily all
portables are
uh practical for real scenarios some of
them are mainly for
uh research uh space
we have uh pc students they're working
on just developing new type of
routings but they may not be really
feasible in reality
so depends on what you're gonna do you
want to work on industry projects or you
want to delve deep into some uh
algorithms and develop your new
algorithm then the
criteria is uh different and in order to
learn more about these
uh apart from the textbook what are some
good resources
for us to look for
[Music]
yes like as in for example if i search
about this
these protocols a lot of scholarly
articles come up
uh but are those the best sort of way to
learn more about them or are there
better sort of websites to go to
to read more about this protocol
in terms of articles i can share a very
good review paper which is
published by one of my colleagues and he
will join our
industry lecture session as well i've
invited a couple of colleagues as well
who is
uh who are mainly focused on research so
uh
in terms of article i'll share that one
with you in terms of industrial
application i will share some resources
with you
but in mainly in industrial application
they want to use
existing algorithms because it would be
really challenging to develop new
algorithms they
basically they want to customize new
algorithms and
adopt them to their challenges but in
terms of research there are many
resources i can share to see how you can
develop new algorithms and by combining
existing algorithms or by generating
something
from scratch
probably i can't have like a reference
in my slide
that will be good thanks
any other questions
uh so uh probably uh
you check microsoft teams if not uh
please do this and
create your groups if you if you know
your team members so
this will help me to find out who has
already joined a team who has not so i
can help others
and every week i will send announcements
through microsoft teams of industrial
campuses as well
but let's use that environment for to
have more interactions together
and you can drop your questions there
especially in general channel
and angus and i will get back to you uh
some support and other other students
can also contribute
do you have you received my invitation
[Music]
yeah the link you put on microsoft team
didn't work
okay
uh the other thing i wanted to mention
for uh
tomorrow's uh for hardware stream
if you are interested to work on
hardware and if you are based in sydney
you like to borrow it i will be on
campus tomorrow during
wirelessness or network lab 123
[Music]
as building 11 level 11 room
403 come over and grab your hardware you
can borrow it throughout the semester
please bring get back in the same
condition
and this is basically for our research
projects but
i just wanted to support my students so
you don't need to purchase them if you
are in sydney
but tomorrow one two three or before
after the class
drop me a message if you uh if you would
not be able to come
to uts between one two three
so we can arrange another song together
any other questions
[Music]
nope no comments no questions
okay for uh apple for quiz uh
it will be online oh is it next week
okay i should check the outlet it will
be online during
lecture time
okay so if there is no question let's
wrap up today's session
thank you all for joining the class i
hope you enjoy it and i hope you learned
new things you're welcome thank you and
i hope to see all of you tomorrow either
one two three or four to six thank you
hopefully thank you have a good day
thank you my pleasure
hopefully recording will be available i
haven't received recording from last
week but
uh uh hopefully the recording will be
available or recorded the session but on
initiates from
zoom to receive the video and i will
upload it online
bye
[Music]
jesus
you
oh
uh
so
hey
oh
okay
uh
come on
let's go
so
oh
okay
you